---
published: false
---
_by Hilary Morris, User Support and Communications for the Southeast and South Atlantic Blueprints_

In case new folks are reading about SECAS with the launch of the first newsletter, I wanted to provide an quick recap of where SECAS has been, and where it's going. Read on to catch up on the history of this initiative! 

SECAS was intiiated by the Southeastern Association of Fish and Wildlife Agencies (SEAFWA) back in Fall 2011. SEAFWA recognized the need to rally conservation partners around a common vision for sustaining natural resources in the Southeast through 2060. Ed Carter, the Executive Director of Tennessee Wildlife Resources Agency, and Cindy Dohner, Southeast Regional Director of the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Agencies, were strong champions for SECAS. In May 2012, Ed invited the Southeast Southeast Natural Resource Leaders Group (SNRLG) to help lead SECAS. SNRLG agreed, establishing an early governance structure made up of SEAFWA Directors and SNRLG Principals. Together, these SECAS leaders represented the state and federal agencies working on natural resources issues in the Southeast region. Each SEAFWA Director and SNRLG Principal also chose a Point of Contact from their organization to participate in more detailed discussions and provide a complementary "bottom-up" governance framework.

In the fall of 2013, SECAS leadership set a goal of developing a first generation Southeast Blueprint for landscape-scale conservation by the fall of 2016. Many different conservation planning efforts were already underway, but most eco-regional plans only covered parts of states, while state-specific plans stopped at the state line. The results of all this parallel planning did not yet add up to an integrated regional strategy.

To help advance progress on the Blueprint and other landscape-scale conservation efforts, [the Southeast Climate Adaptation Science Center funded the Vital Futures project](https://globalchange.ncsu.edu/secsc/projects-fiscal-year/conservation-adaptation-planning-for-landscape-and-climate-change-in-the-southeast/). Vital Futures directly supported SECAS by assessing the implications of climate change and other drivers of landscape change for existing conservation goals and management objectives.

Version 1.0 of the Southeast Blueprint was first introduced at a SECAS summmit at the Fall 2016 SEAFWA annual meeting. There was so much enthusiasm, the summit was standing room only, with people lined up in the doorway trying to catch a glimpse! Development of this first Blueprint relied heavily on Landscape Conservation Cooperative (LCC) partnerships across the Southeast and Caribbean, as well as the Southeast Aquatic Resources Partnership (SARP). This plan provided the first ever integration of spatial plans developed through the South Atlantic, Appalachian, Gulf Coastal Plains and Ozarks, Gulf Coast Prairie, North Atlantic, and Caribbean LCCs. Southeast Blueprint 1.0 was finalized and released in December 2017.

At the Fall 2017 SEAFWA annual meeting, Version 2.0 of the Southeast Blueprint was released. This kicked off the annual process of updating SECAS products for the SEAFWA meeting every fall. Southeast Blueprint 2.0 incorporated the improved subregional Blueprints from several LCCs and established priority connections with western states through the Crucial Habitat Assessment Tool. Significant improvements over the first version included improved consistency across LCC boundaries, improved consistency in climate change response, and improved integration beyond the Southeast. The SEAFWA Directors also charged SECAS with establishing an overarching goal for the SECAS initiative. SECAS leadership and the Points of Contact had all recognized the need to identify a key objective to define what SECAS is working toward, and develop supporting near-term metrics to measure progress.


In Fall 2018, both the SECAS goal and Version 3.0 of the Southeast Blueprint were unveiled. 

Version 3.0 of the Southeast Blueprint was first introduced at the October 2018 SEAFWA annual meeting, and officially released in February 2019. Its development occurred during a time of transition for the LCC Network where the structure and function of some LCCs was changing. Despite these changes, the capacity and commitment to continue to support Blueprint users and improve the Southeast Blueprint remains strong, evidenced by the many examples of Blueprint implementation, as well as recent progress on spatial coverage, connectivity, and threats.

The next version of the Southeast Blueprint is expected in Fall 2019. It will continue the ongoing evolution toward better integration across the various Blueprint inputs and regular updates based on the best available information.