---
published: false
---
Over the past couple of months, SECAS has welcomed three new staff members working on user support for the Southeast Conservation Blueprint. Here you can get to know them a little bit better! If you want to reach out to someone on the user support team to get help using the Blueprint, you can find contact information on [the SECAS staff page](https://secassoutheast.org/staff).

Adam Malcomb is joining the Blueprint User Support team based out of the Lafayette, LA. He comes to the Service from NRCS Louisiana where he has been working with private land owners to put conservation on the ground and increase land stewardship. Adam will be providing Southeast Blueprint user support for Louisiana, Arkansas, and Missouri. When Adam is not working he enjoys gardening, hiking, and fishing with his family.

Brecken is joining the Blueprint User Support team based out of Arlington, TX. She comes to SECAS after two years doing climate change adaptation and scenario planning with the U.S. Geological Survey and the National Park Service. She has an M.S. in Biological Sciences from Boise State University, where she studied plant-herbivore interactions and the use of remote sensing technologies to identify landscapes most suitable for their continued fitness. She is a returned Peace Corps volunteer from Ghana, West Africa, where she taught STEM and literacy courses at a rural middle school and led community and youth programs in life skills, health, and agriculture.

Kayla Feist is joining the Blueprint User Support team as a technician based in the Arkansas Ecological Service Office in Conway, AR. She comes to this role after two years in the Pathways intern program with the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Serrvice where she worked in the National Wildlife Refuge system and the Wildlife Sport Fish Restoration program in various outreach roles. Kayla is a recent graduate from Mississippi State University (MSU) and is also pursuing her online Master's in Environmental Education from MSU. She recently moved to Arkansas and has enjoyed "The Natural State" through outdoor activities such as hiking and kayaking. Kayla is assisting other Blueprint staff in their roles and is excited to contribute to landscape-scale conservation in innovative ways.