I'm so pleased to announce that the brand new SECAS logo and associated branding guide are now available on the resources page](https://secassoutheast.org/resources)! I think the logo does a great job of representing SECAS as a partnership, in all the splendid diversity of its members, ecosystems, and mission. The introductory section of the branding guide says it best:

_The SECAS logo embodies the diverse ecosystems and communities of the Southeast and U.S. Caribbean. The dogwood blossom represents the region’s rich forestry, abundant flora, and continual growth. The mountain road symbolizes the region’s iconic mountain ranges, from the Appalachians to the Sierra de Luquillo, and SECAS’ role in paving the way for a sustainable, prosperous future. The great blue heron is emblematic of interconnected terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems and the harmony between land, water, and sky. The sea trout signifies the economic and cultural value of the region’s aquatic life and the importance of marine conservation. Together, these elements speak to the intricate balance between nature and society, highlighting SECAS’ commitment to fostering a future where fish, wildlife, and people thrive._

I want to first thank Kelly Guilbeau, Social Scientist with the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, for her support with branding and design concepts that helped us articulate what SECAS stands for and what we wanted the logo to embody. She teased out this helpful idea of SECAS serving as a bridge between land and water, people and nature, innovative science and approachable tools. Even though the final design doesn't include a literal bridge, I still see this idea of connection coming through clearly.

All credit for the final logo design and accompanying usage guide goes to my dear friend, Colleen J. Shytle--conservationist, communicator, and graphic artist extraordinaire! She generously donated her time, including some late nights, to put this together, as a contribution to the partnership. Our whole staff is so grateful to her for the time and expertise she invested in understanding all that SECAS is and finding a way to illustrate that in a "fun sized" visual.

I hope you'll agree that SECAS is now looking a lot more official and polished! We've come a long way from our origins as a scrappy, informal forum for the Southeast Landscape Conservation Cooperatives to coordinate their conservation planning efforts. Now we're a full-fledged organization with a formal charter, 10+ years of experience, and a dedicated staff--and a professional-looking logo to match!